In the previous segment,
we saw two outliers in the model
relating the log of infant
mortality to the log of income.
Here, we're going to discuss the options
available to you if you decide
that these outliers really
do belong in the dataset.
You can't just delete them.
The first approach is to look for
additional covariants or
explanatory variables that maybe
able to explain the outliers.
For example, there could be a number of
variables that provide information about
infant mortality above and beyond what
income provides as an explanation.
Looking back at our data, there
are two variables we haven't used yet.
The first one is region and
the second is oil.
The oil variable indicates oil exporting
countries, both Saudi Arabia and Libya
are oil exporting countries, so perhaps
this might explain part of the anomaly.
We've already coded up and
run model 1 where log_income was
the only explanatory variable.
Here now is model 2 where we include
the indicator variable is oil, meaning
is this an oil exporting country along
with a new coefficient for that term.
We've added that coefficient,
as well, to our prior and
we've kept the same prior on
our observation variance.
To run model 2, we need to modify
the data that we send to the model
to include the is_oil indicator.
To create that indicator,
we need to transform the original data,
which is in terms of yes and no.
We want ones to represent yes and
zeroes to represent no.
So this says as.numeric turn the true or
false statement into a number for
whether dat$oil is a yes.
If we run that,
we get a set of 1's and 0's.
Here is the batch of oil
exporting countries right here.
Everything else in the model
setup is the same,
except now we're going to draw three
initial values for our beta vector, and
we'll run mod2 with the new data and
the new initial values.
We'll run 1,000 iterations of burn-in,
And run our samples to be saved.
Let's go ahead and run all of this code.
First, we'll run the rjags library,
And then run model 2.
Every time you ran a new model,
you should always check the convergence
diagnostics for the chain you just ran.
We're going to skip that in
the interest of time here but
I will report that
the chains look okay here.
Let's take a look at the posterior
summary from our chains.
It looks like not much has
changed since model 1.
The intercept is a similar number,
the effect related to income
has not changed much, and
we see a positive relationship
between oil production and
the log of infant mortality.
Because this data are merely
observational, we can't say
that oil production causes
an increase in infant mortality,
indeed, that most certainly is not true.
We can say that they
are positively correlated.
Now let's check the residuals.
We'll follow the same steps we did for
model 1 where we create the design matrix.
We'll call it X2 in this case where
we've now added the is_oil indicator.
So we'll run that line and
take a look at the top of X2.
So now we have a third column for
the oil indicator.
We'll collect our posterior means for
the parameters,
as well as the predicted values
based on those posterior means.
And finally, we'll calculate the residuals
as the difference between the value and
the prediction.
Now let's look at the residuals.
We also want to compare these residuals
to the residuals from model 1.
So let's put both of these plots
on the same screen with par(mfrow.
We want two rows of plots and
one column of plots.
Start an empty plot and we'll fill
it first with the residuals from
the new model and
then the residuals from the old model.
It looks like we do have an improvement.
The residuals in the new model
are closer to the bulk of the data than
the residuals were in the old model,
where they are much further away.
The standard deviation of the residuals
in the second model here is 0.64.
The strongest outlier up here is
more than 2 away from the mean,
which means it's more then
3 standard deviations,
3 times 0.64 away from the mean.
So three standard deviations is
still quite an extreme outlier.
So although we've seen improvement,
these outliers are pretty far away still.
We might consider adding the other
covariant region, but instead,
let's look at another option when
we are faced with strong outliers.
That option is to change the distribution
we use for the likelihood.
The normal distribution or
the normal likelihood has thin tails.
Almost all of the probability in
a normal distribution is concentrated
within the first few standard
deviations of the mean.
This does not accommodate outliers well.
Consequently, models with a normal
likelihood might be overly influenced
by outliers.
Remember the t distribution is
similar to the normal distribution.
Here's a plot with the pdf
of the normal in black and
the pdf of a t distribution with
one degree of freedom in red.
The t distribution is similar
to the normal distribution but
it has thicker tails, which
are better at accommodating outliers.
The t model might look
something like this.
We're not going to run this model but
we're going to step through it and
talk about it a little bit.
Notice that the t distribution,
which we're using as our likelihood here,
has three parameters.
A location, in JAGS,
tau is an inverse scale parameter and
a degrees of freedom parameter.
The smaller the degrees of freedom, the
heavier the tails of the t distribution.
We might fix the degrees of freedom to
some number like we did in this plot or
we can assign it a prior distribution,
that's what we've done here.
The degrees of freedom has
to be a positive number, so
we'll give it an exponential prior.
The inverse scale, or the tau parameter,
behaves similarly to the precision
parameter in the normal model.
It is not exactly the same as
the precision parameter but it's close,
so we'll give it the same dgamma
prior that we used before.
The inverse scale is related
to the standard deviation of
the errors by this equation here.
Finally, we're going to relate
the location parameter with our
linear model form right here.
As a side note, we should aware that the t
distribution does not have a mean and
a variance if the degrees of
freedom is less than two.
That can happen under this model.
If we wanted to force the model, the
likelihood, to have a mean and a variance,
we could increase the degrees of freedom
by two by adding a new variable.
Let's call it nu and then the degrees
of freedom would simply be nu + 2.0.
This would guarantee that the degrees
of freedom is greater than two.
Again, we're not going to fit this model,
we'll leave it up to you.